how do i learn to accept love
hi everyone i'm 18f and i recently
started seeing this guy this is the
first person that i've dated and i'm
starting to notice a few things a few
off things regarding how i perceive the
relationship
i get uncomfortable when he flirts with
me and at one point i thought he was
trying to manipulate me by love bombing
me but when i looked up actual love
bombing he's the farthest from it
growing up i didn't have a father and my
mother wasn't very explicit with her
love for me though i knew it was there
i was treated pretty badly throughout my
school years and bullied in high school
i find myself having a pretty low sense
of self-worth and i feel unlovable
sometimes
i think the guy that i'm seeing is a
really good person and i don't want to
screw things up
i don't know how to accept his
compliments i say thank you but on the
inside i feel like he's lying to me or
he pities me
but i know rationally that isn't true
it's just that when he says i'm pretty
or he offers to take me home i feel
extremely guilty and i feel like i need
to pay him back in some way
i know people do nice things and i
should just let them and i should just
let them but i feel so guilty because i
feel like i don't deserve it
these patterns kind of spill over into
my platonic relationships as well
i find myself wanting to love others but
never wanting to be loved i love
spoiling my friends with small gifts or
favors spending time with them or just
being there every time they need me
i feel like i can't depend on people how
they depend on how people depend on me
people say that i'm not a bad person but
i can't help feeling like i am a bad
person on the inside and i just
masquerade as a good friend and
eventually someone is going to rip off
this mask and that i have and discover
the truth objectively i know that there
are a bunch of discrepancies between
reality and how i feel and i feel silly
for putting all of my thoughts out there
if anyone has advice for this i would
feel greatly i would greatly appreciate
it thank you
okay
so
some people are saying is this me as a
girl i know this is shocking but
sometimes your genitalia does not
correlate with your experience and that
men and women can have similar
experiences
i know it is shocking
so i just want to first shout out uh
give a shout out to this person because
like i want y'all to like think a little
bit about how hard it is to
post something like this right to feel
silly
objectively
like recognize that you're putting
something out there that does not
internally make sense it actually makes
perfect sense
but like it takes so much to be able to
post this
right like you'll see that and there's
so much here like
um i'm starting to notice a few off
things about how i perceive in the
relationship like this is what i mean
about the quality of posts so the person
like is very aware of what they're
experiencing recognizes some
discrepancies and is able to state it
anyway despite the fact that it kind of
feels silly
because if you have low self-esteem
and there's some kind of logical
inconsistency it's really hard for you
to ask for help right you're like this
is just my stupid head
that doesn't make any sense like i don't
even know what how someone can help
someone that's like head is as stupid as
my thoughts are
but the fact that they're able to do
this is actually a huge huge like step
in in the right direction they're able
to notice some of their thoughts and
feelings which are not perfectly aligned
and they're able to
set aside their self-judgment and like
take a step forward in the right
direction
right so this is fantastic
i mean this situation sounds tough but
we'll get there too but like i'm really
proud of like people for the quality of
the post the other thing to remember is
that the community deserves a shout out
too because
we would not get posts like this unless
the responses
were solid
right so if there's a bunch of like
hatred kind of responses like oh you're
a girl like what are you complaining
about men have it so much harder or the
flip side of you know like if there was
like really invalidating stuff then
people wouldn't post things like this
right so it's been a lot of hard work
and and by hard work i mean i think each
and every one of you has been a part of
this i don't and i don't think sometimes
people realize
like how you affect the community
right it's like little things like
reading this and not responding in a
toxic way or responding in a positive
way that make posts like this possible
seriously i'm not kidding go look at
other
go look at like other places on the
internet
right like other support communities
like
you know like
slash r
sad
and like forever alone and like other
places where there's just a lot of
like toxicity
um
or there's just kind of like this echo
chamber empty support right which is
like oh it's never your fault like
there's some subreddits like that where
it's like it's never your fault you're
awesome you keep doing you what i'm
really proud of our community for is
that we're self-reflective
we will like point out things but we'll
do it with kind of compassion which is
awesome okay so let's get to this
so the first thing is as we've talked a
little bit about today let's do a quick
reminder
so our ahamkar is our sense of identity
samskar is an experience that we've had
that shapes our personality
right so what happens is we have a bunch
of experiences that shape our reactions
to things
and based on those experiences we
develop a personality or sense of
identity
okay
so if you're in a relationship and you
feel like you don't deserve love and
this is like actually a really good
example of this i find myself wanting to
love others but never wanting to be
loved right i'm the person who spoils
others and spends time with them but
like
i can't accept their affection like it's
a one-way street because they are good
people and they deserve love but i am
not
and therefore i don't and like
compliments make me feel like
uncomfortable because i don't really
deserve compliments or affection or to
be cared for
so where does this kind of
sense of self because this is an
identity issue right this person does
not feel like they deserve love like
their idea of what they deserve is not
this
so there are a couple of important
things here the first is how does this
form right so we can kind of see this i
was treated pretty badly throughout my
school years and bullied in high school
so i find myself having a pretty low
self-worth and i feel unlovable
sometimes
so let's just like think about these are
just two sentences which is like i was
bullied so check mark right in terms of
your history but what does that actually
do to a person let's try to understand
what does bullying do to a person
so what do you deserve
right how do you determine what you
deserve so let's like think a little bit
about you know like if you're a slave
like if you're a slave let's say like a
thousand years ago
what did you deserve
well like you deserve like less than
other people right a lot of slaves
didn't even feel like they deserved
freedom i mean i've i haven't talked to
a bunch of slaves so i don't really know
but i'm making that assumption
but i've definitely seen for example
like in india there's still somewhat of
like i mean there isn't like a strict
caste system but there's like upper
class people and lower class people
there are bunches of servants and and
you know like there's like this clear
idea of like what each group of people
deserves
so there's like a first class cabin in a
train and there's a third class cabin in
the train in the first class cabin
people get to sit down and third class p
people get to stand
so i've seen in in my own personal life
like how
people are taught
what to expect from the world and what
they deserve
and so when you're bullied
right when people like make fun of you
like on a fundamental level since your
mind isn't really that developed
you just get some like basic programming
that's really like foundational there's
not a whole lot of nuance there's not a
whole lot of like understanding or
digestion or reflection
there's just this is how it is
so when you're a seven-year-old and like
everyone makes fun of you what do you
learn about yourself you learn that oh
i'm the person that people get
gets made fun of
and who gets the praise and adoration
the bully does
right
who gets respected and compliments
and who gets treats the bully does
and what do you get
you get the crap
you get the short end of the stick you
get to be the butt of the jokes and all
the good stuff
goes to the bully and all the bad stuff
goes to you and if this happens to you
at a very young age and it's quite
profound and doesn't have the right
counterbalancing influences there's a
lot here where like maybe your home life
also is important right so like your
parents don't support you in the right
way or don't give you that sense of
identity of like unconditional love to
kind of counter that
i'm not saying it's their fault but like
you know generally speaking not everyone
bully
being bullied ends up like this did we
see something about
yeah okay uh we didn't see much about
this person's what their parental what
their what the relationships of their
parents are like but that's where you
see a lot of good modeling
so if you sort of learn this about
yourself then it kind of becomes true
right so it becomes a part of your
personality it becomes a part of your
identity that i'm the butt of jokes and
i'm not the person who gets complimented
and believe me kids are really good at
this kids are really good at dividing
people into groups there's the popular
kids and they're not popular kids
there's a reason why high school is
brutal it's because instinctively we're
very hierarchical as children so just
like the popular kids and the not
popular kids and you get determined you
get placed in a particular category
which you understand and they understand
so once everyone understands the social
hierarchy there's some degree of harmony
there because everyone has agreed on
what steps people take
and this is why people don't like it
when people get uppity in a social
hierarchy right like human beings
respond very poorly to people getting
uppity we even have a word for it
they're like uppity like you don't know
your place right sure it's toxic but
it's natural
so
what do you do about this right so the
first thing is to understand that these
experiences
are carried forward from the past they
don't necessarily reflect on the present
so what our mind does is carries forward
energy from our some scars from the past
to the present
so for example like the fact that you
don't feel there was so much resentment
no maybe not resentment there's so much
like
low self-worth which you built up during
your teenage years
and you haven't processed that you
haven't therapized it you haven't you
know
spiritually removed it so you carry all
those emotions with you right it's like
emotional baggage we understand this in
terms of romantic relationships when you
have a bad romantic relationship you
carry the emotional baggage forward
so when you have a life of being bullied
you're carrying that emotional baggage
to the present the key thing here
is that
you need to recognize that that is not
from this even though you're feeling it
in the present it is not created from
this relationship your boyfriend is not
love bombing you your boyfriend is
genuinely like appreciating who you are
but the reason it feels like a love bomb
the reason that it feels fake
is because you have this
idea from the past that you don't
deserve this stuff
right so if you don't deserve
compliments and someone is complimenting
you the only logical conclusion you can
come to is there's some kind of
manipulation going on
right it's like really simple
completely logical like i know the
person feels silly like it doesn't make
sense it actually makes perfect sense
it's like if i'm a pos and someone is
treating me well
what am i missing where's the other shoe
what do they want from me like what's
going on here because i definitely don't
deserve this treatment it's actually
perfectly logical
okay
but that's emotional baggage carried
from the past
so this is where in the moment when you
sort of feel that way you need to ask
yourself is this a feeling that's being
created by this interaction or is this
an old feeling that is being stirred up
and the more that you're able to
recognize oh this is a feeling that i've
had from the past that's just like
reawakening just notice it kind of like
think through it a little bit let it go
and and then like you know be where you
are with your boyfriend
and the more that you do that the more
the the baggage will kind of like
decrease and the more you'll be able to
appreciate the compliments okay that's
number one
so number two and i saw someone kind of
post about this or mention this the
other thing is sometimes the way that
people react to this
is by mastery of the trauma so this is a
common thing that sometimes this is why
abusers i mean
the abused become abusers
so there's this psychological thing
where like if i'm on the receiving end
of a particular interaction if i'm the
victim and there's a bully
i can become powerful in that scenario
by switching roles
so the way that i'm gonna like fix this
emotional victimization is by becoming
the perpetrator because there's like one
victim in the scenario
and one person with power so there's the
powerful and the powerless and in the
past i have been the powerless and f
that i'm never being powerless again so
how can i become powerful oh i can start
bullying people
so this is what you see you see that
like you know a lot of bullies like have
bad home situations right i mean
sometimes they're just [ __ ] and they
have good home situations and don't get
appropriately parented which i guess is
a bad home situation as well but
so sometimes bullies are because they
you know parents don't set limits on
them they're like brats
and they don't like experience
consequences but then there's the flip
side of it too which is like the reason
they're abusive to other kids is because
they get abused at home so like you know
their parents make fun of them or nasty
to them so they just like learn that
behavior and then they mimic it
elsewhere
so we can see like mastery of the trauma
by like role reversal like that can
happen too it's not happening in this
situation but that can result you know
that can happen too
and so then also like you know
what can you kind of like do about this
in a very practical sense there are a
couple of other things to consider
the first is that if you're an
altruistic person who does not like to
be helped by other people there's
somewhat of a little bit of a trick that
you can use for your mind i don't think
it fixes the core problem but it can it
can help you can serve as a band-aid
which is recognize that sometimes the
nicest thing that you can do for someone
else
is to let them do something nice for you
right so like you like the way that it
feels to do something good for someone
right
you like to be like a kind person
and recognize that by accepting their
compliments
is like your opportunity to just like
think about your boyfriend for a second
so your boyfriend says thinks thinks
you're pretty and says hey you look
really great today
and if you're like no i don't
screw you why are you saying that right
that's your instinctive reaction like
how does your boyfriend feel it feels
terrible
on the flip side you could say you know
if you say like thank you so much like i
was having a rough day today and like
hearing that i'm having trouble
believing it
but i'm so like happy that you feel that
way
like even if you say that like how's
your boyfriend gonna feel you're gonna
make him turn him into chad mode he's
gonna be like damn
my girlfriend was having a bad day and
she like can't really accept the
compliment but like still i'm doing
something good for her i feel great
about myself because i am making someone
else's life better
right
so when you let other people do things
for you
you know it's it's kind of a it's like a
really nice thing to do for them
right and that's like how you form bonds
with people so i've so some time ago you
know i i used to like always turn down
gifts
you know like i like people would want
to give me gifts like i'd have like a
mentee like i'd write like a letter
recommendation or something right so buy
some kid
and they'd be like i want to send you
like a card to say thank you i'll be
like you don't need to do that
it's not necessary but then i realized
like i'm actually doing them a
disservice
right
it's like let them express gratitude
like let them practice gratitude like
let them express gratitude and then i
will accept their gratitude
and then like i will just tell them that
i appreciate their gratitude and like
it's great on all sides
so this is so confusing because when i
started being a therapist i was kind of
like
it was really tricky right because
people would say thank you so much dr k
i'm like i didn't really do much so it
made me uncomfortable so i wouldn't
accept their things
i'd like reject it because it made me
feel weird they're like oh my god like
you've transformed my life
it's like
did i what are you talking about bro i
just like we've just chatted for a while
i'm glad you're doing better but it's
mostly you
right and then i was like that's
actually kind of doing them into the
service and so that's then i'll say like
you know
you're like
i'm so glad that your life is doing
better i think at the end of the day we
meet for one hour a week and you're like
living your life for 100 hours a week so
i think it's more you than me but i'm
happy to accept whatever gratitude you
have so
right on bro and like keep on trucking
and you're very welcome for whatever you
know whatever you're great like you're
welcome
if it was mostly you
right so you just accept the ground like
accept what they and then like because
how is that person gonna feel if they
come in and they say thank you so much
and i'm like i didn't do anything it's
like their gratitude just it it explodes
in in the hangar you know it doesn't
like get to
get out
there and so you just let you know
accept it so when someone wants to do
something nice for you recognize that
for them one of the nice the nicest
things you can do is as genuinely as
possible try to accept what they want to
do for you
and as you start to engage in these
kinds of things you're gonna have
different some scars
right and you'll start to recognize like
if this happens enough like oh maybe i
am bringing something to the table not
everything not as much as this person
thinks i think i'm bringing a little bit
less but i'm bringing something to the
table and i can be happy for that
right there's some truth to this
so if you have trouble accepting love
you can start by sort of understanding
you know where does this idea that i
don't deserve to be loved come from
you can also start altering your
behavior a little bit recognize that
even though it makes you uncomfortable
it can actually be really really nice to
accept someone else's gratitude
that you're actually like that's a nice
thing to do for them
kind of a little bit of a band-aid
and the last thing is that
you know i don't know how else to say
this but you seem like a fantastic
person
right so like i i think you're
absolutely deserving of love like i
don't get where like just like look at
this look at how awesome this person is
to like imagine if this person was in
your life
so i find myself wanting to love others
i love spoiling my friends with small
gifts and favors
spending time with them
like that's i mean it sounds fantastic
right like they're self-reflective they
like they're not automatic they're not
reactive
so like i'm not surprised that people
you know are happy to you know like this
dude is happy to date this girl because
she seems like a fantastic person she
may have difficulty recognizing that but
i think we can all agree
right that this is like a good person to
date
and it's okay that that that doesn't
sink in yet right because you've got all
this
so this is gonna like not make sense
and so this is the last thing that i'll
kind of leave you all with objectively i
know there are a bunch of discrepancies
between reality and how i feel and yeah
that's because
you were told in the first half of your
life that you're unlovable and now
you're being told that you are lovable
and so that's going to feel like a
discrepancy because it is one
because like it sounds like you were
surrounded by [ __ ] earlier and now
you're in a like what sounds like a
healthy relationship
so like there's it's going to feel
contradictory and silly to you and this
is the real problem this is the kind of
the bullet you have to dodge sometimes
there's a trap here
which is that if you are in a healthy
relationship and you like turn to the
internet
they're gonna tell you oh my god he's
love bombing you don't trust them right
depending on who you go to
what echo chamber you choose to
participate in they will actually
support whatever your paranoia is
and so then i think this person did the
right thing which is they looked up love
bombing and they realized that like
that's not what love bombing is
but this is the other problem with the
internet is that we like to label things
really really quickly and like here's
just a quick aside so gas lighting is a
good example of this
so gas lighting is something that is
generally speaking a systemic and
malicious process that's aimed to disarm
someone's like ability of judgment right
it's like when you convince someone that
they're crazy
but
nowadays i hear gaslighting used anytime
someone has a different opinion from
yours so human beings have different
experiences of shared events like if i
have an argument with my wife about
something
going to think one way about it i'm
going to recall one thing and they're
going to recall something else
and now i've seen something really
tricky which is that when someone says
you did this to me and i say no i didn't
and they respond with you're gaslighting
me there's a gas lighter here
it you can't argue against that right
like it it's become something of a weird
trump card that like once you play the
gaslighting card it's like i can't say
anything because i'm just gaslighting
you further like i'm not allowed to have
an opinion if you accuse me of
gaslighting because anything i say is
just proof of the gaslighting right it's
like kind of weird what's happening
it says no you don't get to have a
different experience or different
perspective from me
so be super careful
about labels on the internet because in
my experience
interactions tend to be like nuanced and
multi-perspective but what we're
starting to do on the internet is get
like terminology like we had a really
good post the other day
about someone was like i had a bad
sexual experience i'm not interested in
having sex again am i asexual
and i see this a lot nowadays where
we're starting to label ourselves with
things we join that identity and then we
don't really acknowledge that sexuality
is like an evolving process right
so what happens when we start to label
ourselves is like then we was like i'm
asexual because i had a bad sexual
experience i go to an asexual community
where everyone else is asexual they
encourage me they say hey you can have a
lovely wonderful experience being
asexual like it's okay it's it's a
normal variant of humanity and i'm fine
with that i'm not saying that there's
anything wrong with being asexual the
problem is that sometimes we
inappropriately label ourselves
so i've had patients for example who
have vaginismus who describe themselves
as
asexual so vaginismus is a
a spasm
of the vaginal muscles which makes it
very painful or even impossible for you
to have penetrative intercourse
and so they didn't realize they had
vaginismus they just thought they were
asexual which is like fine
right like there's nothing wrong with
being asexual but sometimes just because
you have difficulty having sex or don't
enjoy sex doesn't necessarily mean
you're asexual there's a differential
diagnosis for that but the second we
label something
and the second we become a part of that
identity
then we could be losing something right
like because that identity may not apply
and i hope to god this is not being
interpreted as like dr k is against
asexual people i have nothing against
asexual people all i'm saying is don't
label yourself too early
once you've done a very thorough
investigation by all means label
yourself as asexual and live a happy and
fulfilling life without sex
which is what most married people have
to learn how to do in their 40s and 50s
right
so like we can manage that
so it's okay just don't label yourself
prematurely and be careful about some of
these labels because don't label your
partner as gaslighting
when all they're doing is disagreeing
right like human beings are allowed to
have because that's the kind of thing
that is actually going to negatively
hurt your relationships if you have a
relationship with someone and they
disagree with you and you start accusing
them of gaslighting like you can't have
a conversation there there can't be a
way to resolve that conflict once you
play that card
so be super careful about all these like
terms that are getting tossed around
which absolutely can describe behavior
and sometimes be
appropriate like another good example is
like monkey branching right where people
are like this person's monkey branching
they're waiting till they have their
next person in order to before they
break up with this person it's like yeah
some people are like that but the truth
is that sometimes relationships are like
complex and they're not intentionally
monkey branching maybe the reason that
they're like breaking up with you and
dating this person in rapidity is for
all kinds of reasons one is that they
can't tolerate being alone
so like they're just a serial dater that
has nothing to do with monkey branching
that just has to do with their inability
to be by themselves it's a very real
possibility another option is maybe the
relationship was dead on the inside and
they didn't realize that until they met
someone else that started to like they
started to catch feelings for
and that's when they sort of started to
realize and i've seen this too
where it's like i didn't realize like
how bad this relationship was until i
met someone else
like how empty the relationship has
become it doesn't mean they're monkey
branchers
there's all kinds of reasons that can
explain any given interaction for human
beings so just be a little bit careful
about judging things prematurely
and i realize i've come way far astray
from from the post
but
anyway
so kind of going back to this so like
for this person just be careful about
labeling things right
recognize i guess the key takeaway here
is that relationships and human beings
are complex processes a human being in
and of themselves is an incredibly
complex process
put two of them together throw in
interactions and you're getting an
increased order of magnitude on the
complexity of what's going on
so take it slow
it's okay for things to be confusing and
conflicting ain't no problem with that
as you'll discover things will resolve
themselves over time
and don't label things too quickly or
don't stick to those labels be flexible
around you know what your interpretation
of the relationship is
yeah so someone saying had to deal with
good vibes only and no drama guys it's
so annoying yeah so this is the other
thing right so sometimes like people
will be like yeah i'm drama free
i don't do drama and in adopting that
stance
they create drama right because like
the thing is anytime you're going to
have two humans in an interaction
there's going to be some kind of
conflict
and like the way to be you can't be
drama free you can be like drama
resistant
so you can have like good methods of
conflict resolution and like managing
drama or you can pretend to be
drama-free and just peace out anytime
like
the water gets a little bit rough
and then what ends up happening is you
don't build like conflict resolution
skills and you enter into your next
relationship looking for like drama-free
stuff
and then like you have dudes out there
who are looking for like drama-free
stuff
and like the reason they're looking for
it so hard is and because there's so
much drama everywhere because they're
creating it
right
like
yeah i'm not like looking for like
i'm not looking for drama okay so like
manage it
bro
right and it's not just men like this
happens to women too and non-binary
people
i'm judging everyone equally here
but like drama-free only works if you're
on an island and even then today we've
seen posts where there's drama in your
head with yourself
right so like if you're if there's like
if you want to be drama free like
don't look to other people
i'm not saying ignore other people
because some people like said person
will attract drama
but recognize that you have a hand in
the drama and they have a hand in the
drama and if you want to live a
drama-free life don't worry about
finding people that are drama-free worry
about conflict resolution right and then
the way that you filter
people is based on their ability to
participate in conflict resolution so
there's some people out there that can't
participate in conflict resolution i.e
these people who say they're drama free
because when you have a conflict with
them and you say hey i have this issue
with you can we talk about it and
they're like sorry i'm drama free this
sounds like drama to me
i'm out
right that's who you want to avoid
like
you know so like be careful about drama
free like if you want to be drama free
focus on conflict resolution
select for people who can participate in
conflict resolution and then you will
have a relatively drama free life
the key to a drama-free life is not the
people you select it's your capacity for
conflict resolution
you